#LyX 2.0.0svn created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 398
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass sffms_short
\begin_preamble
% copyright lapsed in the United States of America 
%Original .tex file by M.C. de Marco
%Edited for LyX by K. Chester.
\end_preamble
\options courier
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_xetex false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
The Country of the Blind
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
H.G.
 Wells
\end_layout

\begin_layout Surname
Wells
\end_layout

\begin_layout Address
47 The High Street
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

Bromley, Kent
\end_layout

\begin_layout Runningtitle
Blind
\end_layout

\begin_layout Wordcount
9,600
\end_layout

\begin_layout Part*
\begin_inset space \thinspace{}
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Three hundred miles and more from Chimborazo, one hundred from the snows
 of Cotopaxi, in the wildest wastes of Ecuador's Andes, there lies that
 mysterious mountain valley, cut off from all the world of men, the Country
 of the Blind.
 Long years ago that valley lay so far open to the world that men might
 come at last through frightful gorges and over an icy pass into its equable
 meadows, and thither indeed men came, a family or so of Peruvian half-breeds
 fleeing from the lust and tyranny of an evil Spanish ruler.
 Then came the stupendous outbreak of Mindobamba, when it was night in Quito
 for seventeen days, and the water was boiling at Yaguachi and all the fish
 floating dying even as far as Guayaquil; everywhere along the Pacific slopes
 there were land-slips and swift thawings and sudden floods, and one whole
 side of the old Arauca crest slipped and came down in thunder, and cut
 off the Country of the Blind for ever from the exploring feet of men.
 But one of these early settlers had chanced to be on the hither side of
 the gorges when the world had so terribly shaken itself, and he perforce
 had to forget his wife and his child and all the friends and possessions
 he had left up there, and start life over again in the lower world.
 He started it again but ill, blindness overtook him, and he died of punishment
 in the mines; but the story he told begot a legend that lingers along the
 length of the Cordilleras of the Andes to this day.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He told of his reason for venturing back from that fastness, into which
 he had first been carried lashed to a llama, beside a vast bale of gear,
 when he was a child.
 The valley, he said, had in it all that the heart of man could desire---sweet
 water, pasture, an even climate, slopes of rich brown soil with tangles
 of a shrub that bore an excellent fruit, and on one side great hanging
 forests of pine that held the avalanches high.
 Far overhead, on three sides, vast cliffs of grey-green rock were capped
 by cliffs of ice; but the glacier stream came not to them, but flowed away
 by the farther slopes, and only now and then huge ice masses fell on the
 valley side.
 In this valley it neither rained nor snowed, but the abundant springs gave
 a rich green pasture, that irrigation would spread over all the valley
 space.
 The settlers did well indeed there.
 Their beasts did well and multiplied, and but one thing marred their happiness.
 Yet it was enough to mar it greatly.
 A strange disease had come upon them and had made all the children born
 to them there---and, indeed, several older children also---blind.
 It was to seek some charm or antidote against this plague of blindness
 that he had with fatigue and danger and difficulty returned down the gorge.
 In those days, in such cases, men did not think of germs and infections,
 but of sins, and it seemed to him that the reason of this affliction must
 he in the negligence of these priestless immigrants to set up a shrine
 so soon as they entered the valley.
 He wanted a shrine---a handsome, cheap, effectual shrine---to be erected
 in the valley; he wanted relics and such-like potent things of faith, blessed
 objects and mysterious medals and prayers.
 In his wallet he had a bar of native silver for which he would not account;
 he insisted there was none in the valley with something of the insistence
 of an inexpert liar.
 They had all clubbed their money and ornaments together, having little
 need for such treasure up there, he said, to buy them holy help against
 their ill.
 I figure this dim-eyed young mountaineer, sunburnt, gaunt, and anxious,
 hat brim clutched feverishly, a man all unused to the ways of the lower
 world, telling this story to some keen-eyed, attentive priest before the
 great convulsion; I can picture him presently seeking to return with pious
 and infallible remedies against that trouble, and the infinite dismay with
 which he must have faced the tumbled vastness where the gorge had once
 come out.
 But the rest of his story of mischances is lost to me, save that I know
 of his evil death after several years.
 Poor stray from that remoteness! The stream that had once made the gorge
 now bursts from the mouth of a rocky cave, and the legend his poor, ill-told
 story set going developed into the legend of a race of blind men somewhere
 "over there" one may still hear to-day.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And amidst the little population of that now isolated and forgotten valley
 the disease ran its course.
 The old became groping, the young saw but dimly, and the children that
 were born to them never saw at all.
 But life was very easy in that snow-rimmed basin, lost to all the world,
 with neither thorns nor briers, with no evil insects nor any beasts save
 the gentle breed of llamas they had lugged and thrust and followed up the
 beds of the shrunken rivers in the gorges up which they had come.
 The seeing had become purblind so gradually that they scarcely noticed
 their loss.
 They guided the sightless youngsters hither and thither until they knew
 the whole valley marvellously, and when at last sight died out among them
 the race lived on.
 They had even time to adapt themselves to the blind control of fire, which
 they made carefully in stoves of stone.
 They were a simple strain of people at the first, unlettered, only slightly
 touched with the Spanish civilisation, but with something of a tradition
 of the arts of old Peru and of its lost philosophy.
 Generation followed generation.
 They forgot many things; they devised many things.
 Their tradition of the greater world they came from became mythical in
 colour and uncertain.
 In all things save sight they were strong and able, and presently chance
 sent one who had an original mind and who could talk and persuade among
 them, and then afterwards another.
 These two passed, leaving their effects, and the little community grew
 in numbers and in understanding, and met and settled social and economic
 problems that arose.
 Generation followed generation.
 Generation followed generation.
 There came a time when a child was born who was fifteen generations from
 that ancestor who went out of the valley with a bar of silver to seek God's
 aid, and who never returned.
 Thereabout it chanced that a man came into this community from the outer
 world.
 And this is the story of that man.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He was a mountaineer from the country near Quito, a man who had been down
 to the sea and had seen the world, a reader of books in an original way,
 an acute and enterprising man, and he was taken on by a party of Englishmen
 who had come out to Ecuador to climb mountains, to replace one of their
 three Swiss guides who had fallen ill.
 He climbed here and he climbed there, and then came the attempt on Parascotopet
l, the Matterhorn of the Andes, in which he was lost to the outer world.
 The story of that accident has been written a dozen times.
 Pointer's narrative is the best.
 He tells how the little party worked their difficult and almost vertical
 way up to the very foot of the last and greatest precipice, and how they
 built a night shelter amidst the snow upon a little shelf of rock, and,
 with a touch of real dramatic power, how presently they found Nunez had
 gone from them.
 They shouted, and there was no reply; shouted and whistled, and for the
 rest of that night they slept no more.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As the morning broke they saw the traces of his fall.
 It seems impossible he could have uttered a sound.
 He had slipped eastward towards the unknown side of the mountain; far below
 he had struck a steep slope of snow, and ploughed his way down it in the
 midst of a snow avalanche.
 His track went straight to the edge of a frightful precipice, and beyond
 that everything was hidden.
 Far, far below, and hazy with distance, they could see trees rising out
 of a narrow, shut-in valley---the lost Country of the Blind.
 But they did not know it was the lost Country of the Blind, nor distinguish
 it in any way from any other narrow streak of upland valley.
 Unnerved by this disaster, they abandoned their attempt in the afternoon,
 and Pointer was called away to the war before he could make another attack.
 To this day Parascotopetl lifts an unconquered crest, and Pointer's shelter
 crumbles unvisited amidst the snows.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And the man who fell survived.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At the end of the slope he fell a thousand feet, and came down in the midst
 of a cloud of snow upon a snow-slope even steeper than the one above.
 Down this he was whirled, stunned and insensible, but without a bone broken
 in his body; and then at last came to gentler slopes, and at last rolled
 out and lay still, buried amidst a softening heap of the white masses that
 had accompanied and saved him.
 He came to himself with a dim fancy that he was ill in bed; then realized
 his position with a mountaineer's intelligence and worked himself loose
 and, after a rest or so, out until he saw the stars.
 He rested flat upon his chest for a space, wondering where he was and what
 had happened to him.
 He explored his limbs, and discovered that several of his buttons were
 gone and his coat turned over his head.
 His knife had gone from his pocket and his hat was lost, though he had
 tied it under his chin.
 He recalled that he had been looking for loose stones to raise his piece
 of the shelter wall.
 His ice-axe had disappeared.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He decided he must have fallen, and looked up to see, exaggerated by the
 ghastly light of the rising moon, the tremendous flight he had taken.
 For a while he lay, gazing blankly at the vast, pale cliff towering above,
 rising moment by moment out of a subsiding tide of darkness.
 Its phantasmal, mysterious beauty held him for a space, and then he was
 seized with a paroxysm of sobbing laughter
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
After a great interval of time he became aware that he was near the lower
 edge of the snow.
 Below, down what was now a moon-lit and practicable slope, he saw the dark
 and broken appearance of rock-strewn turf He struggled to his feet, aching
 in every joint and limb, got down painfully from the heaped loose snow
 about him, went downward until he was on the turf, and there dropped rather
 than lay beside a boulder, drank deep from the flask in his inner pocket,
 and instantly fell asleep
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He was awakened by the singing of birds in the trees far below.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He sat up and perceived he was on a little alp at the foot of a vast precipice
 that sloped only a little in the gully down which he and his snow had come.
 Over against him another wall of rock reared itself against the sky.
 The gorge between these precipices ran east and west and was full of the
 morning sunlight, which lit to the westward the mass of fallen mountain
 that closed the descending gorge.
 Below him it seemed there was a precipice equally steep, but behind the
 snow in the gully he found a sort of chimney-cleft dripping with snow-water,
 down which a desperate man might venture.
 He found it easier than it seemed, and came at last to another desolate
 alp, and then after a rock climb of no particular difficulty, to a steep
 slope of trees.
 He took his bearings and turned his face up the gorge, for he saw it opened
 out above upon green meadows, among which he now glimpsed quite distinctly
 a cluster of stone huts of unfamiliar fashion.
 At times his progress was like clambering along the face of a wall, and
 after a time the rising sun ceased to strike along the gorge, the voices
 of the singing birds died away, and the air grew cold and dark about him.
 But the distant valley with its houses was all the brighter for that.
 He came presently to talus, and among the rocks he noted---for he was an
 observant man---an unfamiliar fern that seemed to clutch out of the crevices
 with intense green hands.
 He picked a frond or so and gnawed its stalk, and found it helpful.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
About midday he came at last out of the throat of the gorge into the plain
 and the sunlight.
 He was stiff and weary; he sat down in the shadow of a rock, filled up
 his flask with water from a spring and drank it down, and remained for
 a time, resting before he went on to the houses.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
They were very strange to his eyes, and indeed the whole aspect of that
 valley became, as he regarded it, queerer and more unfamiliar.
 The greater part of its surface was lush green meadow, starred with many
 beautiful flowers, irrigated with extraordinary care, and bearing evidence
 of systematic cropping piece by piece.
 High up and ringing the valley about was a wall, and what appeared to be
 a circumferential water channel, from which the little trickles of water
 that fed the meadow plants came, and on the higher slopes above this flocks
 of llamas cropped the scanty herbage.
 Sheds, apparently shelters or feeding-places for the llamas, stood against
 the boundary wall here and there.
 The irrigation streams ran together into a main channel down the centre
 of the valley, and this was enclosed on either side by a wall breast high.
 This gave a singularly urban quality to this secluded place, a quality
 that was greatly enhanced by the fact that a number of paths paved with
 black and white stones, and each with a curious little kerb at the side,
 ran hither and thither in an orderly manner.
 The houses of the central village were quite unlike the casual and higgledy-pig
gledy agglomeration of the mountain villages he knew; they stood in a continuous
 row on either side of a central street of astonishing cleanness, here and
 there their parti-coloured facade was pierced by a door, and not a solitary
 window broke their even frontage.
 They were parti-coloured with extraordinary irregularity, smeared with
 a sort of plaster that was sometimes grey, sometimes drab, sometimes slate-colo
ured or dark brown; and it was the sight of this wild plastering first brought
 the word "blind" into the thoughts of the explorer.
 "The good man who did that," he thought, "must have been as blind as a
 bat."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He descended a steep place, and so came to the wall and channel that ran
 about the valley, near where the latter spouted out its surplus contents
 into the deeps of the gorge in a thin and wavering thread of cascade.
 He could now see a number of men and women resting on piled heaps of grass,
 as if taking a siesta, in the remoter part of the meadow, and nearer the
 village a number of recumbent children, and then nearer at hand three men
 carrying pails on yokes along a little path that ran from the encircling
 wall towards the houses.
 These latter were clad in garments of llama cloth and boots and belts of
 leather, and they wore caps of cloth with back and ear flaps.
 They followed one another in single file, walking slowly and yawning as
 they walked, like men who have been up all night.
 There was something so reassuringly prosperous and respectable in their
 bearing that after a moment's hesitation Nunez stood forward as conspicuously
 as possible upon his rock, and gave vent to a mighty shout that echoed
 round the valley.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The three men stopped, and moved their heads as though they were looking
 about them.
 They turned their faces this way and that, and Nunez gesticulated with
 freedom.
 But they did not appear to see him for all his gestures, and after a time,
 directing themselves towards the mountains far away to the right, they
 shouted as if in answer.
 Nunez bawled again, and then once more, and as he gestured ineffectually
 the word "blind" came up to the top of his thoughts.
 "The fools must be blind," he said.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When at last, after much shouting and wrath, Nunez crossed the stream by
 a little bridge, came through a gate in the wall, and approached them,
 he was sure that they were blind.
 He was sure that this was the Country of the Blind of which the legends
 told.
 Conviction had sprung upon him, and a sense of great and rather enviable
 adventure.
 The three stood side by side, not looking at him, but with their ears directed
 towards him, judging him by his unfamiliar steps.
 They stood close together like men a little afraid, and he could see their
 eyelids closed and sunken, as though the very balls beneath had shrunk
 away.
 There was an expression near awe on their faces.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"A man," one said, in hardly recognisable Spanish.
 "A man it is---a man or a spirit---coming down from the rocks."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But Nunez advanced with the confident steps of a youth who enters upon life.
 All the old stories of the lost valley and the Country of the Blind had
 come back to his mind, and through his thoughts ran this old proverb, as
 if it were a refrain:---
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"In the Country of the Blind the One-Eyed Man is King."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"In the Country of the Blind the One-Eyed Man is King."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And very civilly he gave them greeting.
 He talked to them and used his eyes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Where does he come from, brother Pedro?"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

asked one.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Down out of the rocks."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Over the mountains I come," said Nunez, "out of the country beyond there---wher
e men can see.
 From near Bogota---where there are a hundred thousands of people, and where
 the city passes out of sight."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Sight?"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

muttered Pedro.
 "Sight?"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"He comes," said the second blind man, "out of the rocks."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The cloth of their coats, Nunez saw was curious fashioned, each with a different
 sort of stitching.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
They startled him by a simultaneous movement towards him, each with a hand
 outstretched.
 He stepped back from the advance of these spread fingers.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Come hither," said the third blind man, following his motion and clutching
 him neatly.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And they held Nunez and felt him over, saying no word further until they
 had done so.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Carefully," he cried, with a finger in his eye, and found they thought
 that organ, with its fluttering lids, a queer thing in him.
 They went over it again.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"A strange creature, Correa," said the one called Pedro.
 "Feel the coarseness of his hair.
 Like a llama's hair."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Rough he is as the rocks that begot him," said Correa, investigating Nunez's
 unshaven chin with a soft and slightly moist hand.
 "Perhaps he will grow finer."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Nunez struggled a little under their examination, but they gripped him firm.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Carefully," he said again.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"He speaks," said the third man.
 "Certainly he is a man."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Ugh!"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

said Pedro, at the roughness of his coat.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"And you have come into the world?"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

asked Pedro.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"OUT of the world.
 Over mountains and glaciers; right over above there, half-way to the sun.
 Out of the great, big world that goes down, twelve days' journey to the
 sea."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
They scarcely seemed to heed him.
 "Our fathers have told us men may be made by the forces of Nature," said
 Correa.
 "It is the warmth of things, and moisture, and rottenness---rottenness."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Let us lead him to the elders," said Pedro.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Shout first," said Correa, "lest the children be afraid.
 This is a marvellous occasion."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So they shouted, and Pedro went first and took Nunez by the hand to lead
 him to the houses.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He drew his hand away.
 "I can see," he said.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"See?"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

said Correa.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Yes; see," said Nunez, turning towards him, and stumbled against Pedro's
 pail.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"His senses are still imperfect," said the third blind man.
 "He stumbles, and talks unmeaning words.
 Lead him by the hand."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"As you will," said Nunez, and was led along laughing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It seemed they knew nothing of sight.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, all in good time he would teach them.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He heard people shouting, and saw a number of figures gathering together
 in the middle roadway of the village.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He found it tax his nerve and patience more than he had anticipated, that
 first encounter with the population of the Country of the Blind.
 The place seemed larger as he drew near to it, and the smeared plasterings
 queerer, and a crowd of children and men and women (the women and girls
 he was pleased to note had, some of them, quite sweet faces, for all that
 their eyes were shut and sunken) came about him, holding on to him, touching
 him with soft, sensitive hands, smelling at him, and listening at every
 word he spoke.
 Some of the maidens and children, however, kept aloof as if afraid, and
 indeed his voice seemed coarse and rude beside their softer notes.
 They mobbed him.
 His three guides kept close to him with an effect of proprietorship, and
 said again and again, "A wild man out of the rocks."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Bogota," he said.
 "Bogota.
 Over the mountain crests."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"A wild man---using wild words," said Pedro.
 "Did you hear that---
\emph on
Bogota
\emph default
? His mind has hardly formed yet.
 He has only the beginnings of speech."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A little boy nipped his hand.
 "Bogota!"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

he said mockingly.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Aye! A city to your village.
 I come from the great world---where men have eyes and see."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"His name's Bogota," they said.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"He stumbled," said Correa---" stumbled twice as we came hither."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Bring him in to the elders."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And they thrust him suddenly through a doorway into a room as black as pitch,
 save at the end there faintly glowed a fire.
 The crowd closed in behind him and shut out all but the faintest glimmer
 of day, and before he could arrest himself he had fallen headlong over
 the feet of a seated man.
 His arm, outflung, struck the face of someone else as he went down; he
 felt the soft impact of features and heard a cry of anger, and for a moment
 he struggled against a number of hands that clutched him.
 It was a one-sided fight.
 An inkling of the situation came to him and he lay quiet.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"I fell down," be said; I couldn't see in this pitchy darkness."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There was a pause as if the unseen persons about him tried to understand
 his words.
 Then the voice of Correa said: "He is but newly formed.
 He stumbles as he walks and mingles words that mean nothing with his speech."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Others also said things about him that he heard or understood imperfectly.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"May I sit up?"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

he asked, in a pause.
 "I will not struggle against you again."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
They consulted and let him rise.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The voice of an older man began to question him, and Nunez found himself
 trying to explain the great world out of which he had fallen, and the sky
 and mountains and such-like marvels, to these elders who sat in darkness
 in the Country of the Blind.
 And they would believe and understand nothing whatever that he told them,
 a thing quite outside his expectation.
 They would not even understand many of his words.
 For fourteen generations these people had been blind and cut off from all
 the seeing world; the names for all the things of sight had faded and changed;
 the story of the outer world was faded and changed to a child's story;
 and they had ceased to concern themselves with anything beyond the rocky
 slopes above their circling wall.
 Blind men of genius had arisen among them and questioned the shreds of
 belief and tradition they had brought with them from their seeing days,
 and had dismissed all these things as idle fancies and replaced them with
 new and saner explanations.
 Much of their imagination had shrivelled with their eyes, and they had
 made for themselves new imaginations with their ever more sensitive ears
 and finger-tips.
 Slowly Nunez realised this: that his expectation of wonder and reverence
 at his origin and his gifts was not to be borne out; and after his poor
 attempt to explain sight to them had been set aside as the confused version
 of a new-made being describing the marvels of his incoherent sensations,
 he subsided, a little dashed, into listening to their instruction.
 And the eldest of the blind men explained to him life and philosophy and
 religion, how that the world (meaning their valley) had been first an empty
 hollow in the rocks, and then had come first inanimate things without the
 gift of touch, and llamas and a few other creatures that had little sense,
 and then men, and at last angels, whom one could hear singing and making
 fluttering sounds, but whom no one could touch at all, which puzzled Nunez
 greatly until he thought of the birds.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He went on to tell Nunez how this time had been divided into the warm and
 the cold, which are the blind equivalents of day and night, and how it
 was good to sleep in the warm and work during the cold, so that now, but
 for his advent, the whole town of the blind would have been asleep.
 He said Nunez must have been specially created to learn and serve the wisdom
 they had acquired, and that for all his mental incoherency and stumbling
 behaviour he must have courage and do his best to learn, and at that all
 the people in the door-way murmured encouragingly.
 He said the night---for the blind call their day night---was now far gone,
 and it behooved everyone to go back to sleep.
 He asked Nunez if he knew how to sleep, and Nunez said he did, but that
 before sleep he wanted food.
 They brought him food, llama's milk in a bowl and rough salted bread, and
 led him into a lonely place to eat out of their hearing, and afterwards
 to slumber until the chill of the mountain evening roused them to begin
 their day again.
 But Nunez slumbered not at all.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Instead, he sat up in the place where they had left him, resting his limbs
 and turning the unanticipated circumstances of his arrival over and over
 in his mind.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Every now and then he laughed, sometimes with amusement and sometimes with
 indignation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Unformed mind!"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

he said.
 "Got no senses yet! They little know they've been insulting their Heaven-sent
 King and master
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"I see I must bring them to reason.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Let me think.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Let me think."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He was still thinking when the sun set.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Nunez had an eye for all beautiful things, and it seemed to him that the
 glow upon the snow-fields and glaciers that rose about the valley on every
 side was the most beautiful thing he had ever seen.
 His eyes went from that inaccessible glory to the village and irrigated
 fields, fast sinking into the twilight, and suddenly a wave of emotion
 took him, and he thanked God from the bottom of his heart that the power
 of sight had been given him.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He heard a voice calling to him from out of the village.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Yaho there, Bogota! Come hither!"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At that he stood up, smiling.
 He would show these people once and for all what sight would do for a man.
 They would seek him, but not find him.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"You move not, Bogota," said the voice.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He laughed noiselessly and made two stealthy steps aside from the path.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Trample not on the grass, Bogota; that is not allowed."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Nunez had scarcely heard the sound he made himself.
 He stopped, amazed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The owner of the voice came running up the piebald path towards him.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He stepped back into the pathway.
 "Here I am," he said.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Why did you not come when I called you?"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

said the blind man.
 "Must you be led like a child? Cannot you hear the path as you walk?"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Nunez laughed.
 "I can see it," he said.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"There is no such word as 
\emph on
see
\emph default
," said the blind man, after a pause.
 "Cease this folly and follow the sound of my feet."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Nunez followed, a little annoyed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"My time will come," he said.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"You'll learn," the blind man answered.
 "There is much to learn in the world."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Has no one told you, `In the Country of the Blind the One-Eyed Man is King?'"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"What is blind?"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

asked the blind man, carelessly, over his shoulder.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Four days passed and the fifth found the King of the Blind still incognito,
 as a clumsy and useless stranger among his subjects.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It was, he found, much more difficult to proclaim himself than he had supposed,
 and in the meantime, while he meditated his 
\emph on
coup d'etat
\emph default
, he did what he was told and learnt the manners and customs of the Country
 of the Blind.
 He found working and going about at night a particularly irksome thing,
 and he decided that that should be the first thing he would change.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
They led a simple, laborious life, these people, with all the elements of
 virtue and happiness as these things can be understood by men.
 They toiled, but not oppressively; they had food and clothing sufficient
 for their needs; they had days and seasons of rest; they made much of music
 and singing, and there was love among them and little children.
 It was marvellous with what confidence and precision they went about their
 ordered world.
 Everything, you see, had been made to fit their needs; each of the radiating
 paths of the valley area had a constant angle to the others, and was distinguis
hed by a special notch upon its kerbing; all obstacles and irregularities
 of path or meadow had long since been cleared away; all their methods and
 procedure arose naturally from their special needs.
 Their senses had become marvellously acute; they could hear and judge the
 slightest gesture of a man a dozen paces away---could hear the very beating
 of his heart.
 Intonation had long replaced expression with them, and touches gesture,
 and their work with hoe and spade and fork was as free and confident as
 garden work can be.
 Their sense of smell was extraordinarily fine; they could distinguish individua
l differences as readily as a dog can, and they went about the tending of
 llamas, who lived among the rocks above and came to the wall for food and
 shelter, with ease and confidence.
 It was only when at last Nunez sought to assert himself that he found how
 easy and confident their movements could be.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He rebelled only after he had tried persuasion.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He tried at first on several occasions to tell them of sight.
 "Look you here, you people," he said.
 "There are things you do not understand in me."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Once or twice one or two of them attended to him; they sat with faces downcast
 and ears turned intelligently towards him, and he did his best to tell
 them what it was to see.
 Among his hearers was a girl, with eyelids less red and sunken than the
 others, so that one could almost fancy she was hiding eyes, whom especially
 he hoped to persuade.
 He spoke of the beauties of sight, of watching the mountains, of the sky
 and the sunrise, and they heard him with amused incredulity that presently
 became condemnatory.
 They told him there were indeed no mountains at all, but that the end of
 the rocks where the llamas grazed was indeed the end of the world; thence
 sprang a cavernous roof of the universe, from which the dew and the avalanches
 fell; and when he maintained stoutly the world had neither end nor roof
 such as they supposed, they said his thoughts were wicked.
 So far as he could describe sky and clouds and stars to them it seemed
 to them a hideous void, a terrible blankness in the place of the smooth
 roof to things in which they believed---it was an article of faith with
 them that the cavern roof was exquisitely smooth to the touch.
 He saw that in some manner he shocked them, and gave up that aspect of
 the matter altogether, and tried to show them the practical value of sight.
 One morning he saw Pedro in the path called Seventeen and coming towards
 the central houses, but still too far off for hearing or scent, and he
 told them as much.
 "In a little while," he prophesied, "Pedro will be here." An old man remarked
 that Pedro had no business on path Seventeen, and then, as if in confirmation,
 that individual as he drew near turned and went transversely into path
 Ten, and so back with nimble paces towards the outer wall.
 They mocked Nunez when Pedro did not arrive, and afterwards, when he asked
 Pedro questions to clear his character, Pedro denied and outfaced him,
 and was afterwards hostile to him.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Then he induced them to let him go a long way up the sloping meadows towards
 the wall with one complaisant individual, and to him he promised to describe
 all that happened among the houses.
 He noted certain goings and comings, but the things that really seemed
 to signify to these people happened inside of or behind the windowless
 houses---the only things they took note of to test him by---and of those
 he could see or tell nothing; and it was after the failure of this attempt,
 and the ridicule they could not repress, that he resorted to force.
 He thought of seizing a spade and suddenly smiting one or two of them to
 earth, and so in fair combat showing the advantage of eyes.
 He went so far with that resolution as to seize his spade, and then he
 discovered a new thing about himself, and that was that it was impossible
 for him to hit a blind man in cold blood.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He hesitated, and found them all aware that he had snatched up the spade.
 They stood all alert, with their heads on one side, and bent ears towards
 him for what he would do next.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Put that spade down," said one, and he felt a sort of helpless horror.
 He came near obedience.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Then he had thrust one backwards against a house wall, and fled past him
 and out of the village.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He went athwart one of their meadows, leaving a track of trampled grass
 behind his feet, and presently sat down by the side of one of their ways.
 He felt something of the buoyancy that comes to all men in the beginning
 of a fight, but more perplexity.
 He began to realise that you cannot even fight happily with creatures who
 stand upon a different mental basis to yourself.
 Far away he saw a number of men carrying spades and sticks come out of
 the street of houses and advance in a spreading line along the several
 paths towards him.
 They advanced slowly, speaking frequently to one another, and ever and
 again the whole cordon would halt and sniff the air and listen.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The first time they did this Nunez laughed.
 But afterwards he did not laugh.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One struck his trail in the meadow grass and came stooping and feeling his
 way along it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For five minutes he watched the slow extension of the cordon, and then his
 vague disposition to do something forthwith became frantic.
 He stood up, went a pace or so towards the circumferential wall, turned,
 and went back a little way.
 There they all stood in a crescent, still and listening.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He also stood still, gripping his spade very tightly in both hands.
 Should he charge them?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The pulse in his ears ran into the rhythm of "In the Country of the Blind
 the One-Eyed Man is King."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Should he charge them?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He looked back at the high and unclimbable wall behind---unclimbable because
 of its smooth plastering, but withal pierced with many little doors and
 at the approaching line of seekers.
 Behind these others were now coming out of the street of houses.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Should he charge them?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Bogota!"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

called one.
 "Bogota! where are you?"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He gripped his spade still tighter and advanced down the meadows towards
 the place of habitations, and directly he moved they converged upon him.
 "I'll hit them if they touch me," he swore; "by Heaven, I will.
 I'll hit." He called aloud, "Look here, I'm going to do what I like in this
 valley! Do you hear? I'm going to do what I like and go where I like."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
They were moving in upon him quickly, groping, yet moving rapidly.
 It was like playing blind man's buff with everyone blindfolded except one.
 "Get hold of him!"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

cried one.
 He found himself in the arc of a loose curve of pursuers.
 He felt suddenly he must be active and resolute.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"You don't understand," he cried, in a voice that was meant to be great
 and resolute, and which broke.
 "You are blind and I can see.
 Leave me alone!"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Bogota! Put down that spade and come off the grass!"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The last order, grotesque in its urban familiarity, produced a gust of anger.
 "I'll hurt you," he said, sobbing with emotion.
 "By Heaven, I'll hurt you! Leave me alone!"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He began to run---not knowing clearly where to run.
 He ran from the nearest blind man, because it was a horror to hit him.
 He stopped, and then made a dash to escape from their closing ranks.
 He made for where a gap was wide, and the men on either side, with a quick
 perception of the approach of his paces, rushed in on one another.
 He sprang forward, and then saw he must be caught, and 
\emph on
swish
\emph default
!
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

the spade had struck.
 He felt the soft thud of hand and arm, and the man was down with a yell
 of pain, and he was through.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Through! And then he was close to the street of houses again, and blind
 men, whirling spades and stakes, were running with a reasoned swiftness
 hither and thither.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He heard steps behind him just in time, and found a tall man rushing forward
 and swiping at the sound of him.
 He lost his nerve, hurled his spade a yard wide of this antagonist, and
 whirled about and fled, fairly yelling as he dodged another.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He was panic-stricken.
 He ran furiously to and fro, dodging when there was no need to dodge, and,
 in his anxiety to see on every side of him at once, stumbling.
 For a moment he was down and they heard his fall.
 Far away in the circumferential wall a little doorway looked like Heaven,
 and he set off in a wild rush for it.
 He did not even look round at his pursuers until it was gained, and he
 had stumbled across the bridge, clambered a little way among the rocks,
 to the surprise and dismay of a young llama, who went leaping out of sight,
 and lay down sobbing for breath.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And so his 
\emph on
coup d'etat
\emph default
 came to an end.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He stayed outside the wall of the valley of the blind for two nights and
 days without food or shelter, and meditated upon the Unexpected.
 During these meditations he repeated very frequently and always with a
 profounder note of derision the exploded proverb: "In the Country of the
 Blind the One-Eyed Man is King." He thought chiefly of ways of fighting
 and conquering these people, and it grew clear that for him no practicable
 way was possible.
 He had no weapons, and now it would be hard to get one.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The canker of civilisation had got to him even in Bogota, and he could not
 find it in himself to go down and assassinate a blind man.
 Of course, if he did that, he might then dictate terms on the threat of
 assassinating them all.
 But---Sooner or later he must sleep!
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He tried also to find food among the pine trees, to be comfortable under
 pine boughs while the frost fell at night, and--- with less confidence---to
 catch a llama by artifice in order to try to kill it---perhaps by hammering
 it with a stone---and so finally, perhaps, to eat some of it.
 But the llamas had a doubt of him and regarded him with distrustful brown
 eyes and spat when he drew near.
 Fear came on him the second day and fits of shivering.
 Finally he crawled down to the wall of the Country of the Blind and tried
 to make his terms.
 He crawled along by the stream, shouting, until two blind men came out
 to the gate and talked to him.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"I was mad," he said.
 "But I was only newly made."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
They said that was better.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He told them he was wiser now, and repented of all he had done.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Then he wept without intention, for he was very weak and ill now, and they
 took that as a favourable sign.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
They asked him if he still thought he could 
\emph on
see
\emph default
."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"No," he said.
 "That was folly.
 The word means nothing.
 Less than nothing!"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
They asked him what was overhead.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"About ten times ten the height of a man there is a roof above the world---of
 rock---and very, very smooth.
 So smooth---so beautifully smooth
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
 "He burst again into hysterical tears.
 "Before you ask me any more, give me some food or I shall die!"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He expected dire punishments, but these blind people were capable of toleration.
 They regarded his rebellion as but one more proof of his general idiocy
 and inferiority, and after they had whipped him they appointed him to do
 the simplest and heaviest work they had for anyone to do, and he, seeing
 no other way of living, did submissively what he was told.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He was ill for some days and they nursed him kindly.
 That refined his submission.
 But they insisted on his lying in the dark, and that was a great misery.
 And blind philosophers came and talked to him of the wicked levity of his
 mind, and reproved him so impressively for his doubts about the lid of
 rock that covered their cosmic casserole that he almost doubted whether
 indeed he was not the victim of hallucination in not seeing it overhead.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
So Nunez became a citizen of the Country of the Blind, and these people
 ceased to be a generalised people and became individualities to him, and
 familiar to him, while the world beyond the mountains became more and more
 remote and unreal.
 There was Yacob, his master, a kindly man when not annoyed; there was Pedro,
 Yacob's nephew; and there was Medina-saroté, who was the youngest daughter
 of Yacob.
 She was little esteemed in the world of the blind, because she had a clear-cut
 face and lacked that satisfying, glossy smoothness that is the blind man's
 ideal of feminine beauty, but Nunez thought her beautiful at first, and
 presently the most beautiful thing in the whole creation.
 Her closed eyelids were not sunken and red after the common way of the
 valley, but lay as though they might open again at any moment; and she
 had long eyelashes, which were considered a grave disfigurement.
 And her voice was weak and did not satisfy the acute hearing of the valley
 swains.
 So that she had no lover.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There came a time when Nunez thought that, could he win her, he would be
 resigned to live in the valley for all the rest of his days.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He watched her; he sought opportunities of doing her little services and
 presently he found that she observed him.
 Once at a rest-day gathering they sat side by side in the dim starlight,
 and the music was sweet.
 His hand came upon hers and he dared to clasp it.
 Then very tenderly she returned his pressure.
 And one day, as they were at their meal in the darkness, he felt her hand
 very softly seeking him, and as it chanced the fire leapt then, and he
 saw the tenderness of her face.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He sought to speak to her.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He went to her one day when she was sitting in the summer moonlight spinning.
 The light made her a thing of silver and mystery.
 He sat down at her feet and told her he loved her, and told her how beautiful
 she seemed to him.
 He had a lover's voice, he spoke with a tender reverence that came near
 to awe, and she had never before been touched by adoration.
 She made him no definite answer, but it was clear his words pleased her.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
After that he talked to her whenever he could take an opportunity.
 The valley became the world for him, and the world beyond the mountains
 where men lived by day seemed no more than a fairy tale he would some day
 pour into her ears.
 Very tentatively and timidly he spoke to her of sight.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Sight seemed to her the most poetical of fancies, and she listened to his
 description of the stars and the mountains and her own sweet white-lit
 beauty as though it was a guilty indulgence.
 She did not believe, she could only half understand, but she was mysteriously
 delighted, and it seemed to him that she completely understood.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
His love lost its awe and took courage.
 Presently he was for demanding her of Yacob and the elders in marriage,
 but she became fearful and delayed.
 And it was one of her elder sisters who first told Yacob that Medina-saroté
 and Nunez were in love.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There was from the first very great opposition to the marriage of Nunez
 and Medina-saroté; not so much because they valued her as because they
 held him as a being apart, an idiot, incompetent thing below the permissible
 level of a man.
 Her sisters opposed it bitterly as bringing discredit on them all; and
 old Yacob, though he had formed a sort of liking for his clumsy, obedient
 serf, shook his head and said the thing could not be.
 The young men were all angry at the idea of corrupting the race, and one
 went so far as to revile and strike Nunez.
 He struck back.
 Then for the first time he found an advantage in seeing, even by twilight,
 and after that fight was over no one was disposed to raise a hand against
 him.
 But they still found his marriage impossible.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Old Yacob had a tenderness for his last little daughter, and was grieved
 to have her weep upon his shoulder.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"You see, my dear, he's an idiot.
 He has delusions; he can't do anything right."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"I know," wept Medina-saroté.
 "But he's better than he was.
 He's getting better.
 And he's strong, dear father, and kind---stronger and kinder than any other
 man in the world.
 And he loves me---and, father, I love him."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Old Yacob was greatly distressed to find her inconsolable, and, besides---what
 made it more distressing---he liked Nunez for many things.
 So he went and sat in the windowless council-chamber with the other elders
 and watched the trend of the talk, and said, at the proper time, "He's
 better than he was.
 Very likely, some day, we shall find him as sane as ourselves."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Then afterwards one of the elders, who thought deeply, had an idea.
 He was a great doctor among these people, their medicine-man, and he had
 a very philosophical and inventive mind, and the idea of curing Nunez of
 his peculiarities appealed to him.
 One day when Yacob was present he returned to the topic of Nunez.
 "I have examined Nunez," he said, "and the case is clearer to me.
 I think very probably he might be cured."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"This is what I have always hoped," said old Yacob.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"His brain is affected," said the blind doctor.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The elders murmured assent.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Now, 
\emph on
what
\emph default
 affects it?"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Ah!"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

said old Yacob.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"
\emph on
This
\emph default
," said the doctor, answering his own question.
 "Those queer things that are called the eyes, and which exist to make an
 agreeable depression in the face, are diseased, in the case of Nunez, in
 such a way as to affect his brain.
 They are greatly distended, he has eyelashes, and his eyelids move, and
 consequently his brain is in a state of constant irritation and distraction."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Yes?"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

said old Yacob.
 "Yes?"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"And I think I may say with reasonable certainty that, in order to cure
 him complete, all that we need to do is a simple and easy surgical operation---
namely, to remove these irritant bodies."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"And then he will be sane?"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Then he will be perfectly sane, and a quite admirable citizen."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Thank Heaven for science!"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

said old Yacob, and went forth at once to tell Nunez of his happy hopes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
But Nunez's manner of receiving the good news struck him as being cold and
 disappointing.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"One might think," he said, "from the tone you take that you did not care
 for my daughter."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It was Medina-saroté who persuaded Nunez to face the blind surgeons.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"
\emph on
You
\emph default
 do not want me," he said, "to lose my gift of sight?"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
She shook her head.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"My world is sight."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Her head drooped lower.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"There are the beautiful things, the beautiful little things---the flowers,
 the lichens amidst the rocks, the light and softness on a piece of fur,
 the far sky with its drifting dawn of clouds, the sunsets and the stars.
 And there is 
\emph on
you
\emph default
.
 For you alone it is good to have sight, to see your sweet, serene face,
 your kindly lips, your dear, beautiful hands folded together
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
 It is these eyes of mine you won, these eyes that hold me to you, that
 these idiots seek.
 Instead, I must touch you, hear you, and never see you again.
 I must come under that roof of rock and stone and darkness, that horrible
 roof under which your imaginations stoop
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
 
\emph on
No; you
\emph default
 would not have me do that?"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A disagreeable doubt had arisen in him.
 He stopped and left the thing a question.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"I wish," she said, "sometimes---" She paused.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Yes?"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

he said, a little apprehensively.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"I wish sometimes---you would not talk like that."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Like what?"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"I know it's pretty---it's your imagination.
 I love it, but 
\emph on
now
\emph default
---"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He felt cold.
 "
\emph on
Now
\emph default
?"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

he said, faintly.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
She sat quite still.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"You mean---you think---I should be better, better perhaps---"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He was realising things very swiftly.
 He felt anger perhaps, anger at the dull course of fate, but also sympathy
 for her lack of understanding---a sympathy near akin to pity.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"
\emph on
Dear
\emph default
," he said, and he could see by her whiteness how tensely her spirit pressed
 against the things she could not say.
 He put his arms about her, he kissed her ear, and they sat for a time in
 silence.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"If I were to consent to this?"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

he said at last, in a voice that was very gentle.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
She flung her arms about him, weeping wildly.
 "Oh, if you would," she sobbed, "if only you would!"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
newscene
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For a week before the operation that was to raise him from his servitude
 and inferiority to the level of a blind citizen Nunez knew nothing of sleep,
 and all through the warm, sunlit hours, while the others slumbered happily,
 he sat brooding or wandered aimlessly, trying to bring his mind to bear
 on his dilemma.
 He had given his answer, he had given his consent, and still he was not
 sure.
 And at last work-time was over, the sun rose in splendour over the golden
 crests, and his last day of vision began for him.
 He had a few minutes with Medina-saroté before she went apart to sleep.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"To-morrow," he said, "I shall see no more."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"Dear heart!"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

she answered, and pressed his hands with all her strength.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
"They will hurt you but little," she said; "and you are going through this
 pain, you are going through it, dear lover, for 
\emph on
me
\emph default

\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
 Dear, if a woman's heart and life can do it, I will repay you.
 My dearest one, my dearest with the tender voice, I will repay."
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He was drenched in pity for himself and her.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He held her in his arms, and pressed his lips to hers and looked on her
 sweet face for the last time.
 "Good-bye!"
\begin_inset space \space{}
\end_inset

he whispered to that dear sight, "good-bye!"
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
And then in silence he turned away from her.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
She could hear his slow retreating footsteps, and something in the rhythm
 of them threw her into a passion of weeping.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He walked away.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He had fully meant to go to a lonely place where the meadows were beautiful
 with white narcissus, and there remain until the hour of his sacrifice
 should come, but as he walked he lifted up his eyes and saw the morning,
 the morning like an angel in golden armour, marching down the steeps
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It seemed to him that before this splendour he and this blind world in the
 valley, and his love and all, were no more than a pit of sin.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He did not turn aside as he had meant to do, but went on and passed through
 the wall of the circumference and out upon the rocks, and his eyes were
 always upon the sunlit ice and snow.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He saw their infinite beauty, and his imagination soared over them to the
 things beyond he was now to resign for ever!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He thought of that great free world that he was parted from, the world that
 was his own, and he had a vision of those further slopes, distance beyond
 distance, with Bogota, a place of multitudinous stirring beauty, a glory
 by day, a luminous mystery by night, a place of palaces and fountains and
 statues and white houses, lying beautifully in the middle distance.
 He thought how for a day or so one might come down through passes drawing
 ever nearer and nearer to its busy streets and ways.
 He thought of the river journey, day by day, from great Bogota to the still
 vaster world beyond, through towns and villages, forest and desert places,
 the rushing river day by day, until its banks receded, and the big steamers
 came splashing by and one had reached the sea---the limitless sea, with
 its thousand islands, its thousands of islands, and its ships seen dimly
 far away in their incessant journeyings round and about that greater world.
 And there, unpent by mountains, one saw the sky---the sky, not such a disc
 as one saw it here, but an arch of immeasurable blue, a deep of deeps in
 which the circling stars were floating
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\begin_inset space ~
\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
His eyes began to scrutinise the great curtain of the mountains with a keener
 inquiry.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For example; if one went so, up that gully and to that chimney there, then
 one might come out high among those stunted pines that ran round in a sort
 of shelf and rose still higher and higher as it passed above the gorge.
 And then? That talus might be managed.
 Thence perhaps a climb might be found to take him up to the precipice that
 came below the snow; and if that chimney failed, then another farther to
 the east might serve his purpose better.
 And then? Then one would be out upon the amber-lit snow there, and half-way
 up to the crest of those beautiful desolations.
 And suppose one had good fortune!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He glanced back at the village, then turned right round and regarded it
 with folded arms.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He thought of Medina-saroté, and she had become small and remote.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He turned again towards the mountain wall down which the day had come to
 him.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Then very circumspectly he began his climb.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When sunset came he was not longer climbing, but he was far and high.
 His clothes were torn, his limbs were bloodstained, he was bruised in many
 places, but he lay as if he were at his ease, and there was a smile on
 his face.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
From where he rested the valley seemed as if it were in a pit and nearly
 a mile below.
 Already it was dim with haze and shadow, though the mountain summits around
 him were things of light and fire.
 The mountain summits around him were things of light and fire, and the
 little things in the rocks near at hand were drenched with light and beauty,
 a vein of green mineral piercing the grey, a flash of small crystal here
 and there, a minute, minutely-beautiful orange lichen close beside his
 face.
 There were deep, mysterious shadows in the gorge, blue deepening into purple,
 and purple into a luminous darkness, and overhead was the illimitable vastness
 of the sky.
 But he heeded these things no longer, but lay quite still there, smiling
 as if he were content now merely to have escaped from the valley of the
 Blind, in which he had thought to be King.
 And the glow of the sunset passed, and the night came, and still he lay
 there, under the cold, clear stars.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
